---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Delving into the depths of Javascript
date: 2019-01-16
labels:
  - Software Engineering
  - Learning
---

I don’t know about you, but I love me some Java. Some people may think of it as an acquired taste because of all its subtle nuances but as I’ve
had more and more experience with it, it has grown a special place in my heart. But enough about me and coffee, let’s talk about the
programming language that I have used most frequently in the recent past. While my knowledge of Java is fresh in my mind, I will be comparing
my first experiences with Javascript to the syntax used in this beautiful language that I have grown accustomed to. Working my way through
FreeCodeCamp’s curriculum teaching the basics of Javascript, I have come to realize several differences between these programming languages.

Firstly, Javascript does not declare the type of its variable on variable creation. This allows for flexibility of use after a variable has
been created. This differs significantly from Java where variables are bounded by its assigned type on creation. One of the most significant
aspects of this in my opinion is the fact that an array in Javascript is able to hold variables of multiple types.
In addition, I have not yet come across a case where there is a need to import specific classes or packages. This may be due to the fact that I
have only experienced the very basic concepts involved with Javascript, but I have enjoyed not having to import an ArrayList or other types of 
data structures.
I have found my former experience with Java to be helpful when learning this language due to their similarities. Of course, there are some 
slight differences between how things may be declared and other syntactical differences but overall, things felt somewhat natural when coding 
in Javascript.

When it comes to the aspect of software engineering, one advantage that Javascript appears to have over Java is the fact that its code is 
written more similarly to pseudocode. I believe this may be due to the fact that Javascript is a higher-level language than Java; meaning a lot 
of its complexities are encapsulated similar to a language such as python. As a result, Javascript code on a whole would be more readable; 
subsequently, collaborating and dealing with other people’s code would be less of a hassle. Because Javascript is simpler to write, it also 
allows for faster coding. This makes time-sensitive projects more manageable. On the other hand, one of the aspects of Javascript that I 
believe may hurt readability is its ambiguity with variable declarations. Because of this ambiguity, we would be forced to read through the 
code to see how variables are used whereas, with a program such as Java variables are explicitly created to contain only a single type of 
information.
